README.md, before:

# FPL Squad Optimizer

Tools for extracting, predicting, and optimizing Fantasy Premier League (FPL) squads using machine learning and mathematical optimization.

## Table of Contents
- [Features](#features)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [File Overview](#file-overview)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)
- [Contact](#contact)

## Features
- **Data Extraction**: Fetches and flattens all FPL player data from the official API, including historical stats, and exports to `players.csv`.
- **Squad Optimization**: Loads player data, builds ML features, predicts next gameweek points, and selects the optimal 15-player squad and starting XI under FPL rules and budget constraints.
- **ML Prediction**: Uses XGBoost (if available) or RandomForest to predict expected points for each player.
- **Integer Linear Programming**: Uses PuLP to maximize squad points while respecting FPL constraints (budget, positions, max players per team).
- **Flexible Formation**: Automatically selects the best starting XI and formation.

## Installation
Clone the repository and install dependencies:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/elxecutor/fpl-squad.git
cd fpl-squad
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Usage
1. **Export player data**:
	```bash
	python export.py
	```
	This will create `players.csv` with all player details.
2. **Run squad optimizer**:
	```bash
	python squad.py
	```
	This will output the optimized squad, starting XI, captain/vice, and save predictions to `predicted.csv`.

## File Overview
- `export.py`: Extracts and flattens FPL player data from the API to `players.csv`.
- `squad.py`: Loads `players.csv`, predicts points, and optimizes squad selection.
- `players.csv`: Output player data for ML and optimization.
- `predicted.csv`: Output predicted points for each player.
- `requirements.txt`: Python dependencies.

## Contributing
We welcome contributions! Please see our [Contributing Guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) and [Code of Conduct](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) for details.

## License
This project is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).

## Contact
For questions or support, please open an issue or contact the maintainer via [X](https://www.x.com/elxecutor/).

Commit message:

Refactor FPL Squad Optimizer: - Updated README to reflect new features including dynamic formation selection and JSON export. - Removed squad.py; integrated its functionality into mvp_pipeline.py for streamlined processing. - Added mvp_pipeline.py for data reshaping and feature engineering. - Enhanced squad_optimizer.py to optimize squad selection and output JSON for frontend use. - Introduced train_model.py for training ML models with time-based split and hyperparameter tuning using Optuna.

README.md, after:

# FPL Squad Optimizer

Tools for extracting, predicting, and optimizing Fantasy Premier League (FPL) squads using machine learning. Includes dynamic formation selection, bench output, and full JSON export for frontend use.

## Table of Contents
- [Features](#features)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [File Overview](#file-overview)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)
- [Contact](#contact)

## Features
- **Data Extraction & Feature Engineering**: Reshapes and engineers FPL player data for ML prediction.
- **ML Prediction**: Uses Ridge and XGBoost (Optuna tuning) to predict next gameweek points for each player.
- **Squad Optimization**: Selects the optimal 15-player squad, starting XI, captain, vice-captain, and bench under FPL rules and budget constraints.
- **Dynamic Formations**: Automatically selects the best formation (or user-specified) for the starting XI.
- **Bench Output**: Clearly separates starting XI and bench in both console and JSON output.
- **JSON Export**: Outputs full squad, starting XI, bench, captain, vice-captain, and formation to `optimal_squad.json` for frontend integration.

## Installation
Clone the repository and install dependencies:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/elxecutor/fpl-squad.git
cd fpl-squad
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Usage
1. **Extract FPL player data**:
	```bash
	python export.py
	```
	This will fetch and flatten FPL player data from the API, saving it to `players.csv`.
2. **Run the full pipeline**:
	```bash
	python mvp_pipeline.py
	```
	This will reshape data, engineer features, and output `players_timeseries.csv`.
3. **Train the model and predict points**:
	```bash
	python train_model.py
	```
	This will train ML models and output predictions to `predicted_next_gw.csv`.
4. **Optimize squad selection**:
	```bash
	python squad_optimizer.py
	# Or specify a formation:
	python squad_optimizer.py 3-5-2
	```
	This will output the optimal squad, starting XI (sorted by position), bench, captain, vice-captain, and formation in both console and `optimal_squad.json`.

## File Overview
- `export.py`: Extracts and flattens FPL player data from the API to `players.csv`.
- `mvp_pipeline.py`: Reshapes and engineers features for ML prediction, outputs `players_timeseries.csv`.
- `train_model.py`: Trains ML models and outputs predicted points to `predicted_next_gw.csv`.
- `squad_optimizer.py`: Loads predictions, optimizes squad selection, outputs starting XI, bench, captain, vice-captain, and formation in both console and `optimal_squad.json`.
- `players.csv`: Output player data for ML and optimization.
- `players_timeseries.csv`: Feature-engineered player data for ML.
- `predicted_next_gw.csv`: Output predicted points for each player.
- `optimal_squad.json`: Full squad, starting XI, bench, captain, vice-captain, and formation for frontend use.
- `requirements.txt`: Python dependencies.

## Contributing
We welcome contributions! Please see our [Contributing Guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) and [Code of Conduct](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) for details.

## License
This project is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).

## Contact
For questions or support, please open an issue or contact the maintainer via [X](https://www.x.com/elxecutor/).
